README.md, before:

# BG3 Mac Mod Manager

A native macOS application for managing Baldur's Gate 3 mods, inspired by [LaughingLeader's BG3 Mod Manager](https://github.com/LaughingLeader/BG3ModManager) for Windows.

Built with Swift and SwiftUI, this tool provides a first-class macOS experience for installing, organizing, and managing BG3 mods - including full integration with [bg3se-macos](https://github.com/tdimino/bg3se-macos) (Script Extender for macOS).

## Features

### Mod Management
- **Discover & import mods**: scans your Mods folder and imports `.pak` files (or ZIPs containing them)
- **Drag-and-drop load order**: reorder active mods to control load priority
- **Activate / deactivate**: toggle mods between active and inactive with a click
- **Rich metadata**: displays name, author, version, description, UUID, dependencies, and tags parsed from `info.json` or `meta.lsx` inside `.pak` files
- **Dependency warnings**: flags mods with missing dependencies
- **Search & filter**: find mods by name, author, folder, or tags

### PAK File Reading
- **Native LSPK v18 reader**: reads Larian's proprietary `.pak` archive format directly, with no external tools
- **Extracts `meta.lsx`**: parses mod metadata from inside `.pak` files when `info.json` isn't available
- **LZ4 & Zlib decompression**: handles both Solid and non-Solid compressed archives using macOS's built-in Compression framework

### modsettings.lsx Management
- **Reads & writes** the game's `modsettings.lsx` configuration file
- **Preserves GustavDev** — always keeps the required base game module entry
- **Auto-backup** — creates a timestamped backup before every save
- **File locking** — optionally locks `modsettings.lsx` (via `chflags uchg`) to prevent the game from overwriting your configuration

### Profiles
- **Save** your current mod configuration (load order + active mods) as a named profile
- **Load** profiles to quickly switch between setups
- **Import / export** profiles as JSON for sharing with others

### Script Extender Integration
- **Status detection**: checks if `bg3se-macos` is installed and deployed
- **SE mod flagging**: identifies mods that require the Script Extender (by detecting `ScriptExtender/Config.json` inside `.pak` files)
- **Installation guide**: provides step-by-step instructions for installing bg3se-macos
- **Log viewer**: read SE logs directly from the app
- **Debug options**: documents `BG3SE_NO_HOOKS`, `BG3SE_NO_NET`, `BG3SE_MINIMAL` environment variables

### Game Launch
- **Launch BG3** directly from the app via Steam
- **Quick access**: open Mods folder, modsettings.lsx, or SE logs in Finder

## Requirements

- **macOS 13 (Ventura)** or later
- **Baldur's Gate 3** installed via Steam
- **Xcode 15+** or Swift 5.9+ toolchain (for building)
- [bg3se-macos](https://github.com/tdimino/bg3se-macos) (optional, for Script Extender mods)

## Building

### Method 1: Xcode (Recommended for Development)

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/ShaiLaric/BG3MacModManager.git
cd BG3MacModManager
```

2. Open in Xcode:
```bash
open Package.swift
```

3. Select the **"BG3MacModManager"** scheme from the scheme dropdown

4. Build and run with **⌘R** (or just build with **⌘B**)

Xcode will automatically create a proper `.app` bundle after building. The app will launch with full GUI support and appear in the Dock.

### Method 2: Command Line Build Script (Distribution Builds)

For creating universal binaries (Intel + Apple Silicon) with code signing for distribution:

```bash
# Ad-hoc signing (for local use)
./scripts/build-app.sh

# Or sign with Developer ID for public distribution
./scripts/build-app.sh --sign "Developer ID Application: Your Name (TEAMID)"
```

The app bundle will be created at `build/BG3 Mac Mod Manager.app`.

### Method 3: Direct SPM Build (Command-Line Only)

For quick testing without a GUI app bundle:

```bash
# Build
swift build

# Run directly (background process, no Dock icon)
swift run BG3MacModManager
```

**Note:** Direct `swift run` launches as a background process without appearing in the Dock or creating a proper .app bundle. Use Method 1 or 2 for full GUI experience.

## File Locations

The app works with these standard BG3 paths on macOS:

| Item | Path |
|------|------|
| Mods folder | `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/Mods/` |
| Mod settings | `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/PlayerProfiles/Public/modsettings.lsx` |
| Save games | `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/PlayerProfiles/Public/Savegames/Story/` |
| Game (Steam) | `~/Library/Application Support/Steam/steamapps/common/Baldurs Gate 3/` |
| SE dylib | `...Baldur's Gate 3.app/Contents/MacOS/libbg3se.dylib` |
| SE logs | `~/Library/Application Support/BG3SE/logs/` |
| App profiles | `~/Library/Application Support/BG3MacModManager/Profiles/` |
| App backups | `~/Library/Application Support/BG3MacModManager/Backups/` |

## Project Structure

```
Sources/BG3MacModManager/
├── App/
│   ├── BG3MacModManagerApp.swift   # SwiftUI app entry point
│   └── AppState.swift              # Central observable state
├── Models/
│   ├── ModInfo.swift               # Mod data model
│   └── ModProfile.swift            # Profile data model
├── Services/
│   ├── PakReader.swift             # LSPK v18 .pak file reader
│   ├── ModSettingsService.swift    # modsettings.lsx read/write
│   ├── ModDiscoveryService.swift   # Mod folder scanning
│   ├── ScriptExtenderService.swift # bg3se-macos integration
│   ├── ProfileService.swift        # Profile save/load
│   ├── BackupService.swift         # Backup management
│   └── GameLaunchService.swift     # Game launch via Steam
├── Views/
│   ├── ContentView.swift           # Main window with sidebar
│   ├── ModListView.swift           # Active/inactive mod lists
│   ├── ModRowView.swift            # Single mod row
│   ├── ModDetailView.swift         # Mod detail panel
│   ├── ProfileManagerView.swift    # Profile management
│   ├── BackupManagerView.swift     # Backup management
│   ├── SEStatusView.swift          # Script Extender status
│   └── SettingsView.swift          # App preferences
└── Utilities/
    ├── FileLocations.swift         # macOS file path registry
    └── Version64.swift             # BG3 version encoding/decoding
```

## How It Works

### Mod Discovery
1. Scans `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/Mods/` for `.pak` files
2. For each `.pak`, attempts to read metadata in this order:
   - `info.json` alongside the `.pak` file (most common for NexusMods downloads)
   - `meta.lsx` extracted from inside the `.pak` file (requires LSPK v18 parsing)
   - Falls back to deriving the mod name from the filename
3. Cross-references with `modsettings.lsx` to determine active/inactive state

### Load Order
- The `ModOrder` section of `modsettings.lsx` defines which mods load and in what order
- **Last loaded wins** for conflicting changes - mods later in the list override earlier ones
- `GustavDev` (the base game module) is always preserved as the first entry

### macOS-Specific Notes
- Only `.pak`-based mods work on macOS (no DLL/native mods)
- The Mods directory must be flat - no subdirectories (the game resets `modsettings.lsx` otherwise)
- File locking via `chflags uchg` prevents the game from overwriting your settings

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to open issues or submit pull requests.

## License

This project is open source. See the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- [LaughingLeader/BG3ModManager](https://github.com/LaughingLeader/BG3ModManager) - the original Windows BG3 Mod Manager
- [tdimino/bg3se-macos](https://github.com/tdimino/bg3se-macos) - Script Extender for macOS
- [Norbyte/lslib](https://github.com/Norbyte/lslib) - reference for LSPK format and LSX parsing
- [BG3 Modding Wiki](https://bg3.wiki/wiki/Modding:Installing_mods) - modding documentation

Commit message:

Remove PLAN.md, update README with completed features
- Delete obsolete PLAN.md (historical dev log now superseded by CLAUDE.md backlog)
- Add "Quality of Life Improvements" section to README documenting:
  - Unsaved changes tracking
  - Status bar mod count
  - Sidebar badges
  - Keyboard shortcuts (Cmd+Shift+E, Cmd+Delete, Cmd+Shift+G)
- Update license section to specify GPL-3.0

https://claude.ai/code/session_0113fDtXVjvJ9Ft3xfA54dXK

README.md, after:

# BG3 Mac Mod Manager

A native macOS application for managing Baldur's Gate 3 mods, inspired by [LaughingLeader's BG3 Mod Manager](https://github.com/LaughingLeader/BG3ModManager) for Windows.

Built with Swift and SwiftUI, this tool provides a first-class macOS experience for installing, organizing, and managing BG3 mods - including full integration with [bg3se-macos](https://github.com/tdimino/bg3se-macos) (Script Extender for macOS).

## Features

### Mod Management
- **Discover & import mods**: scans your Mods folder and imports `.pak` files (or ZIPs containing them)
- **Drag-and-drop load order**: reorder active mods to control load priority
- **Activate / deactivate**: toggle mods between active and inactive with a click
- **Rich metadata**: displays name, author, version, description, UUID, dependencies, and tags parsed from `info.json` or `meta.lsx` inside `.pak` files
- **Dependency warnings**: flags mods with missing dependencies
- **Search & filter**: find mods by name, author, folder, or tags

### PAK File Reading
- **Native LSPK v18 reader**: reads Larian's proprietary `.pak` archive format directly, with no external tools
- **Extracts `meta.lsx`**: parses mod metadata from inside `.pak` files when `info.json` isn't available
- **LZ4 & Zlib decompression**: handles both Solid and non-Solid compressed archives using macOS's built-in Compression framework

### modsettings.lsx Management
- **Reads & writes** the game's `modsettings.lsx` configuration file
- **Preserves GustavDev** — always keeps the required base game module entry
- **Auto-backup** — creates a timestamped backup before every save
- **File locking** — optionally locks `modsettings.lsx` (via `chflags uchg`) to prevent the game from overwriting your configuration

### Profiles
- **Save** your current mod configuration (load order + active mods) as a named profile
- **Load** profiles to quickly switch between setups
- **Import / export** profiles as JSON for sharing with others

### Script Extender Integration
- **Status detection**: checks if `bg3se-macos` is installed and deployed
- **SE mod flagging**: identifies mods that require the Script Extender (by detecting `ScriptExtender/Config.json` inside `.pak` files)
- **Installation guide**: provides step-by-step instructions for installing bg3se-macos
- **Log viewer**: read SE logs directly from the app
- **Debug options**: documents `BG3SE_NO_HOOKS`, `BG3SE_NO_NET`, `BG3SE_MINIMAL` environment variables

### Game Launch
- **Launch BG3** directly from the app via Steam
- **Quick access**: open Mods folder, modsettings.lsx, or SE logs in Finder

### Quality of Life Improvements
- **Unsaved changes tracking**: Visual indicator on the Save button when load order has been modified but not saved
- **Status bar mod count**: Always-visible "N active / M inactive" summary in the bottom status bar
- **Sidebar badges**: Warning count badge on Mods tab, profile count, backup count
- **Keyboard shortcuts**:
  - `Cmd+Shift+E` — Export active load order as ZIP
  - `Cmd+Delete` — Deactivate selected mods
  - `Cmd+Shift+G` — Launch Baldur's Gate 3

## Requirements

- **macOS 13 (Ventura)** or later
- **Baldur's Gate 3** installed via Steam
- **Xcode 15+** or Swift 5.9+ toolchain (for building)
- [bg3se-macos](https://github.com/tdimino/bg3se-macos) (optional, for Script Extender mods)

## Building

### Method 1: Xcode (Recommended for Development)

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/ShaiLaric/BG3MacModManager.git
cd BG3MacModManager
```

2. Open in Xcode:
```bash
open Package.swift
```

3. Select the **"BG3MacModManager"** scheme from the scheme dropdown

4. Build and run with **⌘R** (or just build with **⌘B**)

Xcode will automatically create a proper `.app` bundle after building. The app will launch with full GUI support and appear in the Dock.

### Method 2: Command Line Build Script (Distribution Builds)

For creating universal binaries (Intel + Apple Silicon) with code signing for distribution:

```bash
# Ad-hoc signing (for local use)
./scripts/build-app.sh

# Or sign with Developer ID for public distribution
./scripts/build-app.sh --sign "Developer ID Application: Your Name (TEAMID)"
```

The app bundle will be created at `build/BG3 Mac Mod Manager.app`.

### Method 3: Direct SPM Build (Command-Line Only)

For quick testing without a GUI app bundle:

```bash
# Build
swift build

# Run directly (background process, no Dock icon)
swift run BG3MacModManager
```

**Note:** Direct `swift run` launches as a background process without appearing in the Dock or creating a proper .app bundle. Use Method 1 or 2 for full GUI experience.

## File Locations

The app works with these standard BG3 paths on macOS:

| Item | Path |
|------|------|
| Mods folder | `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/Mods/` |
| Mod settings | `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/PlayerProfiles/Public/modsettings.lsx` |
| Save games | `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/PlayerProfiles/Public/Savegames/Story/` |
| Game (Steam) | `~/Library/Application Support/Steam/steamapps/common/Baldurs Gate 3/` |
| SE dylib | `...Baldur's Gate 3.app/Contents/MacOS/libbg3se.dylib` |
| SE logs | `~/Library/Application Support/BG3SE/logs/` |
| App profiles | `~/Library/Application Support/BG3MacModManager/Profiles/` |
| App backups | `~/Library/Application Support/BG3MacModManager/Backups/` |

## Project Structure

```
Sources/BG3MacModManager/
├── App/
│   ├── BG3MacModManagerApp.swift   # SwiftUI app entry point
│   └── AppState.swift              # Central observable state
├── Models/
│   ├── ModInfo.swift               # Mod data model
│   └── ModProfile.swift            # Profile data model
├── Services/
│   ├── PakReader.swift             # LSPK v18 .pak file reader
│   ├── ModSettingsService.swift    # modsettings.lsx read/write
│   ├── ModDiscoveryService.swift   # Mod folder scanning
│   ├── ScriptExtenderService.swift # bg3se-macos integration
│   ├── ProfileService.swift        # Profile save/load
│   ├── BackupService.swift         # Backup management
│   └── GameLaunchService.swift     # Game launch via Steam
├── Views/
│   ├── ContentView.swift           # Main window with sidebar
│   ├── ModListView.swift           # Active/inactive mod lists
│   ├── ModRowView.swift            # Single mod row
│   ├── ModDetailView.swift         # Mod detail panel
│   ├── ProfileManagerView.swift    # Profile management
│   ├── BackupManagerView.swift     # Backup management
│   ├── SEStatusView.swift          # Script Extender status
│   └── SettingsView.swift          # App preferences
└── Utilities/
    ├── FileLocations.swift         # macOS file path registry
    └── Version64.swift             # BG3 version encoding/decoding
```

## How It Works

### Mod Discovery
1. Scans `~/Documents/Larian Studios/Baldur's Gate 3/Mods/` for `.pak` files
2. For each `.pak`, attempts to read metadata in this order:
   - `info.json` alongside the `.pak` file (most common for NexusMods downloads)
   - `meta.lsx` extracted from inside the `.pak` file (requires LSPK v18 parsing)
   - Falls back to deriving the mod name from the filename
3. Cross-references with `modsettings.lsx` to determine active/inactive state

### Load Order
- The `ModOrder` section of `modsettings.lsx` defines which mods load and in what order
- **Last loaded wins** for conflicting changes - mods later in the list override earlier ones
- `GustavDev` (the base game module) is always preserved as the first entry

### macOS-Specific Notes
- Only `.pak`-based mods work on macOS (no DLL/native mods)
- The Mods directory must be flat - no subdirectories (the game resets `modsettings.lsx` otherwise)
- File locking via `chflags uchg` prevents the game from overwriting your settings

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to open issues or submit pull requests.

## License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- [LaughingLeader/BG3ModManager](https://github.com/LaughingLeader/BG3ModManager) - the original Windows BG3 Mod Manager
- [tdimino/bg3se-macos](https://github.com/tdimino/bg3se-macos) - Script Extender for macOS
- [Norbyte/lslib](https://github.com/Norbyte/lslib) - reference for LSPK format and LSX parsing
- [BG3 Modding Wiki](https://bg3.wiki/wiki/Modding:Installing_mods) - modding documentation
